GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm Gw
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: the E
crisis. Frustration and tensions
William Brangham reports from Hu
with police at the border and on
bound for Western Europe.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As Hungarian P
Orban calls for the rest of this
be built faster to keep refugees
out, others in Europe are debati
and how to let more people in.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this Tues
nuclear deal that now cannot be
Democratic senators push it over
Plus, from trash to treasure: ho
chef salvages food scraps from g
And magical forces unleashed in
Writer Salman Rushdie on his new
tale of reason battling extremis
SALMAN RUSHDIE, Author, "Two Yea
and Twenty-Eight Nights": I alwa
that these two ways of talking,
the fable, you know, the fairy t
other being history, the scholar
what happened, I think they're b
ways to understand human nature.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The human drama engu
showed no sign of ending today.
divide deepened, between rich an
over how to handle the crisis. A
new trouble in southern Hungary
of people tried to cross from Se
have a report from the scene aft
summary.
A county clerk in Kentucky was r
after five days in jail for refu
marriage licenses for same-sex c
federal judge who'd jailed Kim D
of court ordered her released. H
not to stop her deputies from gi
Later, Davis appeared at a rally
jail, with hundreds of supporter
presidential hopeful Mike Huckab
KIM DAVIS, Rowan County, Kentuck
We serve a living God who knows
each and every one of us is at.
on pressing, don't let down, bec
here. He is worthy. He is worthy
guys. Thank you so much.
GWEN IFILL: Another Republican p
candidate, Ted Cruz, also visite
Hillary Clinton now says she is
using a private e-mail account a
of state. She made the statement
an interview with ABC News.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D), Pres
That was a mistake. And I'm sorr
I take responsibility. And I'm t
as transparent as I possibly can
GWEN IFILL: Clinton had declined
in two other interviews since Fr
A Kansas jury is recommending th
for a white supremacist who atta
sites last year. Frazier Glenn M
and killed three people and said
to kill Jews. But it turned out
of the victims was Jewish. In a
Miller told the jury he didn't c
decided, and he gave the Nazi sa
Wall Street bounced back today f
its biggest gains of the year. T
industrial average was up 390 po
above 16490. The Nasdaq rose 128
the S&P 500 added 48.
The government of Turkey sent mi
into Northern Iraq today for the
in four years, chasing Kurdish r
followed attacks by so-called PK
that killed at least 31 soldiers
since Sunday. A military ceremon
today for 16 police officers who
roadside bombing. And in Ankara,
Recep Tayyip Erdogan defended hi
efforts.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish Pr
translator): We have tried so mu
keep trying to prevent this pain
pain of mothers, fathers, wives,
and loved ones. But the terror o
has shut the doors to the desire
through choosing weapons, violen
and bloodshed.
GWEN IFILL: Turkey's air force a
heavy new strikes on PKK bases i
than 50 planes.
A huge sandstorm blew across the
today, blanketing cities and roa
Egypt to Jordan. Low visibility
in Lebanon, where the storm kill
two people and sent hundreds to
with breathing problems. The sto
Syria's military to call off air
rebel positions.
Iran's president, Hassan Rouhani
his country is open to talks wit
States and Saudi Arabia on endin
war in Syria. In Tehran, Rouhani
during a news conference with th
president of Austria.
HASSAN ROUHANI, Iranian Presiden
translator): Iran will sit down
if it sees that a secure, stable
future for Syria will be the end
negotiations. What is also impor
those Syrians who have been made
to return home. If one day, Syri
secure, that will be in the inte
whole region and the world.
GWEN IFILL: Iran has been a lead
of Syrian President Bashar al-As
Pope Francis announced a much si
today for the Catholic Church to
Now there will be a fast-track o
both spouses request an annulmen
can grant it directly. Annulment
if a Roman Catholic wants to rem
church and continue to receive c
Back in this country, the family
Gray reached a settlement with t
Baltimore for $6.4 million. The
died after being critically inju
custody last April. His death sp
and rioting. Six Baltimore polic
face criminal charges in the cas
The head of United Airlines has
his dealings with the Port Autho
York and New Jersey. Jeff Smisek
senior executives stepped down t
grand jury is investigating whet
scheduled flights to benefit the
former chairman.
And some family news. Veteran po
Kohut died early today of leukem
the Gallup Organization for 10 y
founding director of the Pew Res
Starting in 1982, Andy was also
guest on this program, explainin
mood and political trends. He co
that role for more than 30 years
was 73 years old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
grow frustrated by blocked passa
Europe; with Democrats' support,
that cannot be undone, and much
Hungary's government called in b
to ferry crowds from its souther
Serbia to a registration center,
move did little to ease tensions
of migrants and refugees into Eu
unabated.
The "NewsHour"'s William Brangha
tonight from that border region,
Hungary
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For hundreds o
Syria and other parts of the Mid
their journey had come to a halt
field. This isn't an official ca
are several miles away and fille
So this is where the Hungarians
else.
Dozens of armed police lined the
field. There weren't enough buse
everyone to other processing cen
and so frustrations boiled over.
pleaded with police to let her e
mother onto a bus. Police said n
so the family gave up, saying th
back over the border to Serbia.
For others, the waiting was just
A large group pressed against th
and then finally broke through.
hundred people took off across t
a desperate rush. Police tried t
but the majority got away. Most
into the cornfields. Some shoute
to Budapest, more than 110 miles
This young boy Hassan made it th
cornfield and said he wants to g
He said his family's home in Syr
in the war, they had been forced
and being trapped in Hungary was
much.
BOY: It's been two days, and the
piling up, and there's no toilet
They just throw food at us, and
stay, stay. We don't want food.
to cross peacefully. We mean no
want to get to our destination.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For those who
the seemingly endless waiting ga
Here at this border, this fence,
put up by the Hungarian governme
in stark contrast to the respons
European nations. As Hungarian P
Orban calls for the rest of this
be built faster to keep refugees
out, others in Europe are debati
and how to let more people in.
Germany alone is expecting some
for asylum this year. That's equ
roughly 1 percent of its current
Chancellor Angela Merkel has cal
mandatory quota system across th
where different nations would be
different numbers of people to t
an idea she reiterated today whe
with the Swedish prime minister
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
translator): I think we need a f
in Europe. Binding quotas or num
on sharing out refugees who are
asylum, and who then are distrib
among the member states. Unfortu
are far from that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Hungary and ot
European nations have rejected a
But the president of the Europea
Juncker, will unveil a plan tomo
homes for more than 120,000 refu
in Washington, the Obama adminis
it is -- quote -- "actively cons
to assist, including resettling
the United States.
JOHN KIRBY, Pentagon Press Secre
year, 2015, we have resettled so
70,000 refugees from all around
not just from the Syrian conflic
have to balance that against the
procedures to make sure that, pa
when we're bringing in people fr
of the world, that we're doing i
securely. The American people wo
that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Meanwhile, in
from 60 countries met today to a
root cause of the crisis, the on
flaring in the Middle East. The
Arab League agreed with this bro
speaking in Cairo.
NABIL ELARABY, Arab League Secre
I must pay tribute to all Europe
and particularly Germany. Howeve
like to emphasize that this is n
of the problem. What is needed i
conflict in Syria.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But as diploma
the world debate the appropriate
the human wave keeps pouring ont
shores, including hundreds more
today outside Athens, Greece. An
Hungary, even as more people con
wait for a ride out of here to a
the flow of people coming across
from Serbia also continues.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Will
in Roszke, Hungary.
GWEN IFILL: As William just repo
waves of arrivals of refugees an
continue throughout Eastern and
no more so than in Greece.
That's where Krishnan Guru-Murth
Television News found an increas
situation on Lesbos, an island o
where, every day, 4,000 people a
ashore.
KRISHNAN GURU-MURTHY: It is hot,
dirty. They have little food and
tempers are fraying and people t
each other.
Why are you so upset?
MAN: Because everyone has fake p
go. They take tickets and go. I
papers, and they didn't give me
MAN: They don't pay attention. T
help.
KRISHNAN GURU-MURTHY: Every one
has paid a smuggler to get here
on an crowded inflatable dinghy.
A Syrian journalist, Ali Hafez (
his own family's journey as they
Mytilini Strait yesterday. The s
them: "Stop. Please be quiet."
"Just do your job and steer the
says.
Halfway across, another boat joi
the panic reaches new heights. T
believe they are about to be hit
Greek couple on the other boat t
a rope and tow them towards the
is obvious relief.
But even now, they still have a
to get to Mytilini. Nobody can l
until the Greeks can process the
seems overwhelmed, despite the s
of a new processing center today
of Greece's border protection fo
it herself. She is pessimistic.
And how many have left today?
MAJ. GEN. ZACHAROULA TSIRIGOTI,
than 6,000.
KRISHNAN GURU-MURTHY: And how ma
have arrived?
MAJ. GEN. ZACHAROULA TSIRIGOTI:
KRISHNAN GURU-MURTHY: So this is
have to carry on everyday?
MAJ. GEN. ZACHAROULA TSIRIGOTI:
yes.
KRISHNAN GURU-MURTHY: Do you see
MAJ. GEN. ZACHAROULA TSIRIGOTI:
KRISHNAN GURU-MURTHY: This is th
park. They call it the garden of
And it has been taken off by vas
of people who've arrived over th
days and who can't get off the i
they are waiting to be registere
have got are these tents that ha
by a mixture of private donation
agencies. And that is where they
on the ferry to Athens.
Mason Hassini is just 16 years o
here alone from Kabul in Afghani
MAN: We thought that, wherever w
Greek -- the people would help u
see if they will register us and
and place to sleep. But no one h
are in the park, sleeping in the
we have -- we don't have anythin
It's about two days. I myself di
except water.
KRISHNAN GURU-MURTHY: Tonight, t
down at the port is still very t
one international charity says i
an aid distribution because the
guarantee their safety.
GWEN IFILL: Tune in tomorrow nig
Brangham continues his reporting
as the continent grapples with i
influx of refugees and migrants
You can follow along with our te
post photos and videos on our Fa
That's at Facebook.com/NewsHour.
Members of Congress returned fro
recess today, and immediately in
would hand the White House a key
the Iran nuclear deal.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the U
Let's give it up for the nationa
Duke Blue Devils.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: As President Ob
Duke University's basketball cha
White House was celebrating its
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
We are pleased, gratified that w
able to build sufficient support
States Congress.
LISA DESJARDINS: This morning, t
four remaining Senate Democratic
announced they will back the nuc
They were Richard Blumenthal of
Gary Peters of Michigan and Ron
That gave Minority Leader Harry
supporters at least 41 votes, en
majority Republicans from disapp
deal.
SEN. HARRY REID (D-NV), Minority
I am gratified to say to my fell
our negotiating partners, and ou
around the world, this agreement
LISA DESJARDINS: It also means t
will not have to use his veto po
the deal. But even with the outc
certain, Senate Majority Leader
again took aim at what the admin
negotiated.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Maj
We know that the president's dea
end its nuclear program, but wou
leave Iran with a threshold nucl
recognized as legitimate by the
community, quite the opposite of
goal.
LISA DESJARDINS: And Maine's Sus
made it unanimous: All 54 Republ
Senate now officially oppose the
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS (R), Maine: I
believed that a verifiable diplo
with Iran would be a major achie
that doesn't describe the agreem
administration negotiated. The a
fundamentally flawed.
LISA DESJARDINS: But in the Sena
the president's viewpoint is pre
while House Republicans may reje
deal this week, that's look like
as the issue will go.
GWEN IFILL: And political direct
joins me now from Capitol Hill.
Just in the last few moments, Li
discovered that number went from
with the additional yea or nay v
on how you add this up, of Senat
from Washington State. What's th
of this number of 41 or 42 as it
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, technical
our viewers probably caught on t
change the endgame. The White Ho
votes to support this deal, to k
last week, but it is very signif
it says something about the stre
deal and the strength of this pr
The strength of this deal is imp
international watchers and Ameri
are wondering, how long will thi
Will this deal last through, say
president? Forty-one votes shows
42 in this case -- has some more
than it did last week.
And also about the strength of t
President Obama won these votes
by convincing senators. Many of
had huge doubts. And, frankly, o
told me today that they don't tr
here. It's not a question of tru
question of them verifying what
this deal.
And 41 percent, Gwen, interestin
around the approval rating of th
and that's about what he got her
sign of how much strength he has
or not.
GWEN IFILL: Lisa, you spent the
the reasons behind all of this o
Hill, why the president got this
who flipped in the end. What can
us?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, one of th
conversations I had was with the
Senator Ron Wyden. He's a import
up here, head of the Senate Fina
He didn't decide until this week
staff told me one of the key ind
him that he was going to go yes
a letter from the White House to
have a copy of it right here --
White House gave him an assuranc
White House would stand by snapp
reimposing sanctions as soon as
sign of cheating by Iran.
We heard that before, but, Gwen,
interesting in this letter, they
only the U.S., but European alli
reimpose sanctions the minute th
cheating that happens.
Now, you can say this isn't the
This is just a letter to a senat
just shows what these senators h
They want it in writing from the
what's being guaranteed and what
The other theme, Gwen, you see t
these senators who have decided
day, none of them love this deal
most of them don't like it, but
said, unfortunately, they don't
alternative right now. They thin
proceed without restrictions if
do something.
GWEN IFILL: Lisa, we spent a lot
about the Senate, but this also
approved or not disapproved in t
well. Over the weekend, we got w
to be a pretty significant expre
from Debbie Wasserman Schultz, w
head of the Democratic National
but is also a leading Jewish mem
who has been speaking with -- be
with the Israeli pushback agains
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
Gwen, I had a good phone convers
Congresswoman Wasserman Schultz
And she really conveyed how much
a difficult decision for her.
Here's how she got to yes. She s
with her constituents, in partic
in her district. It's between Mi
Lauderdale. Not just her, Gwen,
enough, she brought down Vice Pr
Biden. This is when she says she
He answered questions for her an
constituents.
She said most of them don't like
She listened. And then, Gwen, I
is what turned it for a lot of m
Congress. Wasserman Schultz went
House some 20 different times, s
Situation Room, sat one on one w
officials, sat down with Treasur
Jack Lew.
One by one, I think the White Ho
these votes as members asked que
got details about this deal. She
others, put out a five-, six-pag
over the weekend in terms of why
to her decision. But I think it
one over hundreds of questions t
the White House.
GWEN IFILL: Now, as you know as
just because the president has t
doesn't mean that he -- that all
goes away. And we're going to se
on that -- to that point tomorro
Hill, anti-Iran deal rallies.
So, what happens next? What is t
that has to drop? We have a dead
week, right?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
There's a deadline next week. Co
60 days to act. That runs out ne
they will act before that, Gwen.
a vote in the House this week. A
to Senator McConnell's staff in
it looks like we could have a vo
Senate as early as Friday. Maybe
slip into next week, but in the
that will happen.
Of course, once these votes are
like you're saying, Gwen, I thin
to see this issue, well, at leas
of next year on the campaign tra
GWEN IFILL: So, it's still all o
shouting, but the shouting hasn'
LISA DESJARDINS: Oh, it will get
think.
GWEN IFILL: Lisa Desjardins for
on Capitol Hill, thank you very
LISA DESJARDINS: You got it.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a l
the outsiders who changed presid
history; Salman Rushdie mixes fa
history in his new novel; and te
guitar to Texas youth who have h
with the law.
Now to our latest installment in
series that we're calling Food G
We have been looking at efforts
food waste and to use it more pr
During our reporting earlier thi
dropped in on noted chef Dan Bar
just launched a pop-up restauran
He was showcasing how good food
from ingredients we normally tos
Allison Aubrey of NPR took a loo
was on the menu and Barber's app
This story is part of the "NewsH
collaboration with NPR.
DAN BARBER, Chef: Ordering a sal
egg, and ending a burger dumplin
MAN: Yes!
WOMAN: Yes!
ALLISON AUBREY: At 7:00 p.m., th
was working at full-throttle and
was packed. The main draw? Think
Michelin-starred waste. That's w
Barber was serving up at his ton
Village restaurants for $15 doll
Barber's restaurant Blue Hill un
eco-makeover of sorts. Every nig
weeks, he transformed food trash
and called it wastED.
DAN BARBER: Get out a nice burge
we can finish that, please.
WOMAN: Yes!
ALLISON AUBREY: On the menu? A j
cheeseburger.
DAN BARBER: How do you like your
ALLISON AUBREY: A dish called do
skate-wing cartilage and cucumbe
I have heard you talk about cucu
I don't even know what those are
(CROSSTALK)
DAN BARBER: Cucumber butts are f
processor, a pickling processor
New York who cuts off the ends o
so these aren't staring at you i
jar. Right, there is an industry
pickle butts. I didn't make that
ALLISON AUBREY: Wow.
DAN BARBER: He was excited. We c
we said we're going to start a m
your discarded butts.
ALLISON AUBREY: People buying cu
instead of tossing them out, wel
part of Dan Barber's vision.
DAN BARBER: We actually have the
creativity to take what you deem
or refuse and turn that into the
That's very powerful.
ALLISON AUBREY: Barber's no ordi
DAN BARBER: Pick up here, please
ALLISON AUBREY: He's won multipl
Awards and, in 2009, made it ont
100 most influential list.
He's profiled in a recent Netfli
called "Chef's Table" on notable
around the world.
DAN BARBER: If really thinking a
that you can solve in your lifet
thinking too small.
ALLISON AUBREY: Barber always se
thinking big thoughts and they a
on this 80-acre plot of land jus
Manhattan, where he combines an
farm and restaurant. It's called
Barns Food and Agricultural Cent
The mission? To change the way A
and farm. Adjoining the center i
restaurant, a true farm-to-table
DAN BARBER: In this day and age,
a message to broadcast, and in t
we're broadcasting that vegetabl
delicious fiber that could be ut
ALLISON AUBREY: Vegetable pulp?
as Barber's right-hand man, chef
transformed beet and celery pulp
from a local juice bar named Liq
make something that lots of peop
want to eat.
Oh, I have to say looking at thi
look appealing. It looks like I
wet grass.
ADAM KAYE, Chef: Well, it really
like celery. You can see there's
of fiber in there, which we will
up a little bit so it's not comp
DAN BARBER: Yes. And this normal
tossed out?
ADAM KAYE: This would be tossed
be composted or landfill.
ALLISON AUBREY: So why not turn
burger? That beet pulp looks kin
So this looks like a meat loaf m
have made.
ADAM KAYE: Yes. I mean, no pun i
let's call it a beet loaf. Right
(LAUGHTER)
ALLISON AUBREY: I love that.
ADAM KAYE: This has become proba
the most popular items on the wa
ALLISON AUBREY: Really?
ADAM KAYE: It's just incredible.
-- people are going crazy about
convinced that we're sneaking, I
beef fat there or like bacon dri
something.
ALLISON AUBREY: Really?
ADAM KAYE: They said it tastes s
ALLISON AUBREY: Besides the vege
there are a bunch of other ingre
ADAM KAYE: Chopped toasted mushr
natural almonds with the skin on
texture.
ALLISON AUBREY: All right.
ADAM KAYE: And what else? We hav
mushrooms.
ALLISON AUBREY: And some Blue Hi
that he couldn't reveal.
ADAM KAYE: There you go. You're
DAN BARBER: The hope here is to
demand that then kick-starts a l
for an economy that gives the ju
a reason to save that pulp and d
it and use it. I mean, I don't k
juice bars actually become the n
kiosks.
ALLISON AUBREY: So this is the m
to give this a try?
DAN BARBER: Yes. I hope I haven'
ALLISON AUBREY: We will see. All
little bit of this wasted beet k
it.
(CROSSTALK)
ALLISON AUBREY: This is not a ve
wannabe. This is actually -- thi
DAN BARBER: Yes.
ALLISON AUBREY: Like, I would ea
might even think that there's be
DAN BARBER: I wouldn't lie to PB
ALLISON AUBREY: To garnish that
burger, Barber's prized pickle b
And out in the seating area, din
by walls draped with a white fab
use on their crops as a cover to
pests. The tables were lit up wi
candles, which is rendered beef
Michael Parillo and Margit Verv
finished the
dumpster dive salad made with br
and pears salvaged from a food p
the neighborhood. And what's in
Water left over canned chick pea
And as you were tasting it, were
this is left over from an indust
processor? How was it?
WOMAN: Surprisingly good. Yes, y
surprisingly good.
MICHAEL PARILLO, Diner: Yes. It
It's sort of a shabby chic.
ALLISON AUBREY: They almost orde
called dog food, made from anima
are usually discarded, but:
MICHAEL PARILLO: We planned to o
food, but we made a last-minute
different direction.
DAN BARBER: The other idea is to
of these ingredients like this a
that you're going to see later t
start to think about it in the c
where were we with sushi 30 year
I mean, anyone who was going out
sushi dinner 30 years ago was cr
be like eating insects today. Ri
30 years ago was the insect of t
ALLISON AUBREY: And wastED had a
famous chefs from around the cou
in to dine and join Barber in th
In the house that night, award-w
from Chicago Grant Achatz, whose
Alinea, is ranked ninth best in
MAN: We can't throw that away, r
ALLISON AUBREY: Achatz came with
brew of cocoa husks. The husks a
shell of the cocoa bean that are
thrown out during processing. Ac
up some cocoa husk smoked eggpla
So can salvaging a few servings
or some cocoa husks really addre
food waste problem?
DAN BARBER: I'm hopeful that thi
thing begins a different kind of
that really is to back away and
at the entirety of the food syst
to tail and think about not just
the juice -- the pulp that comes
juice, and can we make something
out of it?
ALLISON AUBREY: Barber's veggie
actually made it on the menu at
chain Shake Shack. It was only f
just one location, but all 500 b
fast.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Alli
of NPR News in New York.
GWEN IFILL: There are nearly two
candidates running for president
and the ones getting the most at
not all elected officials. They
Donald Trump, Ben Carson, Bernie
Carly Fiorina, using YouTube, In
other social media to build huge
and get onto debate stages.
But is this really brand-new? Or
here before?
We turn to three political histo
Brown, who directs George Washin
Graduate School of Political Man
"NewsHour" regulars Michael Besc
author of nine books, and Richar
whose most recent book was on th
Nelson Rockefeller.
So, Michael Beschloss, a lot of
running. We seem to be paying at
them. But the ones catching fire
the politicians or at least seen
as being the politicians. How un
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS, Presidential
Well, it has happened before a l
And maybe the best example of th
been Ross Perot in 1992.
What he basically said was, I'm
I have never held public office.
means I'm not implicated in thes
that have taken the country the
So he went on "Larry King" in Fe
1992.
GWEN IFILL: Remember.
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: And he said,
want me to run, I will run as a
candidate, and I will attack the
which neither party is doing any
He allowed himself, at least in
to be recruited. He ran, and at
early that year, at least in the
he was running ahead of George H
Bill Clinton, the two major-part
GWEN IFILL: And he was a third-p
But we have seen people even fro
parties, Lara Brown, who have br
this and changed up the whole fe
race before Ross Perot.
LARA BROWN, Director, George Was
Graduate School of Political Man
I think that's right.
What we really have to do is mak
And that distinction is those wh
outsiders, who really mean they'
Washington, vs. those who call t
outsiders because they're outsid
altogether.
GWEN IFILL: For example?
LARA BROWN: For example, we can
who run. They often say things l
of Washington. I'm going to go a
government and get it back on tr
seen that with Jimmy Carter. We
seen that with Ronald Reagan.
But then you do have those who s
outside of politics altogether,
Ross Perot fits that model, as M
has written. So too has Wendell
GWEN IFILL: Wendell Willkie. You
to use Wendell Willkie.
OK, Richard Norton Smith, there'
Who is your favorite outsider wh
see as someone who was part of t
and managed to upend things?
RICHARD NORTON SMITH, Scholar in
George Mason University: Yes.
Well, actually, go back 200 year
Jackson transformed American pol
in many ways reinvented the Amer
running as an outsider. Certainl
was horrified. It's one of the g
of American democracy, the scene
Day, 1829, when Jackson and his
descended on the town, took it o
was never quite the same.
At the end of the 19th century,
Jennings Bryan, who gave voice t
of mostly Southern and Western f
others who felt victimized by Wa
A lot of this is -- the question
are you outside of? It's not onl
establishment that they run agai
the economic policies that it re
that in turn are centered symbol
Wall Street.
GWEN IFILL: Michael, let's go ba
Carter, who Lara mentioned. I fo
were 17 candidates, Democratic c
for president in 1976.
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: Right.
GWEN IFILL: It's remarkable.
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: It is.
And that's one reason why Jimmy
himself as an outsider. And to s
that was a big sham, because he
had been in politics for over a
had been in the Georgia State Se
governor of Georgia.
But he knew that in the wake of
and also with all these other pe
himself from, it would be most h
him to say, I'm not from Washing
a lawyer. That was very much wit
And as Lara mentioned, the same
Ronald Reagan when he ran for pr
'76. His announcement speech, he
me because I'm not part of the W
buddy system.
And, yes, he wasn't from Washing
wouldn't nominate Ronald Reagan
and the first person who is goin
the establishment.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let's think ab
a moment. Are outsiders outsider
they themselves represent someth
different, or is it because of w
of the American public is at the
Brown?
LARA BROWN: Well, a lot of it is
They're trying to essentially cl
to a feeling that's in kind of r
something else that is going on.
So, as we have discussed, Jimmy
about because there was Watergat
this opportunity. You know, you
back to, in fact, 1924, when Joh
the nomination at the Democratic
after 103 ballots. There are iss
election because William McAdoo
up in the Teapot Dome scandal an
money from Edward Doheny.
So there was a sense that he was
and that that nomination shouldn
So there is this way in which ou
in, or there is essentially surf
a number of candidates running w
are opportunities to do so.
GWEN IFILL: Well, we certainly a
with surfeit ambition in any cam
certainly in this one.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: So, let me ask you,
Smith, a little bit about what t
the process. But does this actua
our weaken the establishment par
-- the rise of the Donald Trumps
of the Wendell Willkies, or does
it just predictable?
RICHARD NORTON SMITH: Traditiona
traditionally, it's been a blip.
was no age of Willkie. That's fo
who knows what will happen over
months.
What is, however, seemingly uniq
and we saw some of this particul
Republican side for years ago, w
remember, there were a number of
candidates who stressed the fact
were not part of the Washington
-- both Jimmy Carter and Ronald
effect went to the electorate wi
that, we're outsiders, we're not
mess, but we have the right expe
have the right skill set, as gov
major states, to fix what is wro
What is really unusual about thi
outsiders is that they are runni
the very qualifications that hav
been viewed as necessary to be a
president.
GWEN IFILL: And I wonder, Michae
this is all sped up because of t
the Internet or conservative rad
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: Absolutely.
GWEN IFILL: That people who mayb
just thought about running befor
instant platforms.
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: And for most
history, if you wanted a major p
you would have to be chosen by o
and officeholders would have bee
people who would have chosen som
not run for office or served bef
So this is something that's rela
But Richard also makes a good po
is that outsiders do wonderfully
are really angry about something
is an overwhelming issue of fore
Americans are probably going to
about giving the keys to someone
have that kind of experience.
Ross Perot got 19 percent in 199
he could do that is that the Col
over and the country seemed as p
it had been for a long time.
GWEN IFILL: So, as a protest can
for the sake of protest, does th
add to or perhaps enhance our po
Lara?
LARA BROWN: Well, throughout mos
what protest candidates have rea
raised issues that the major can
then adopted or co-opted.
And they have moved on to essent
those ideas in their platforms,
and, if they have won, their pre
In fact, you can see the focus o
Clinton and Newt Gingrich on iss
the budget as really being about
that Ross Perot was raising in '
GWEN IFILL: And I remember, Rich
Jesse Jackson in 1998 and 1984.
outsider candidate who brought u
else brought up.
RICHARD NORTON SMITH: He was, ab
and had significant, lasting imp
You go back a few years earlier,
candidate, an outsider named Geo
who ran first in the Democratic
'64, and then a third-party camp
He never came close to winning,
is no doubt that he had a dispro
impact both on the debate that y
on the heralding of a conservati
really incorporated not only the
but for a couple decades thereaf
He was an agent of change who ha
effect, even though he never won
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Well, we will be watching for th
or maybe proportionate, effect i
year.
Richard Norton Smith, Michael Be
Brown, thank you all.
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: Thank you.
LARA BROWN: Pleasure. Thanks.
GWEN IFILL: Next: a novel that c
magic of genies and the reality
in our own time.
Jeffrey Brown has our story from
Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: In Salman Rushdie
the genies, or jinn, are out of
and on the loose in New York, en
a crack in the world, bringing o
what's called the Strangenesses.
SALMAN RUSHDIE, Author, "Two Yea
and Twenty-Eight Nights": These
have arrived to start attacking
And one of them has a tendency t
a sea monster, and he just rises
the ferry.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a world in s
our own, reason battling extremi
busy city, but one in which grea
suddenly disappear, a beautiful
water, but a police boat keeping
In the novel, fear is in the air
magic. These are genies, after a
SALMAN RUSHDIE: The book of cour
kind of comic devices, but it's,
talking about something serious,
an attack on the city.
JEFFREY BROWN: Mixing magic and
and history, it's what Salman Ru
been doing in his writing for de
new book is titled "Two Years Ei
and Twenty-Eight Nights," which
to add up to 1,001. And like the
Arabian Nights," Rushdie told me
at the Waverly Inn, one of his f
spots, this novel began as a sto
itself.
SALMAN RUSHDIE: I grew up fallin
with this kind of story, this ki
wonder tale of the East, you kno
you're a child growing up in Ind
around you.
And I think one of the gifts it
a writer was this early knowledg
are not true.
JEFFREY BROWN: Stories are not t
SALMAN RUSHDIE: No, they're made
JEFFREY BROWN: In case you had a
right?
SALMAN RUSHDIE: Yes, you know, t
Bovary and a flying carpet, they
untrue in the same way. Somebody
up. And once...
JEFFREY BROWN: Even though we th
of them as being realistic.
SALMAN RUSHDIE: You think of one
realistic and the other one is n
they're both fictions.
So once you get that instinct fo
the fictionality of fiction, it
you free. And all my life, it's
that has recurred to a greater o
in the various books. And this t
thought to let it rip.
JEFFREY BROWN: Rushdie actually
new book with a historical figur
philosopher who lived in 12th ce
In the West, he's known as Averr
name, though, is Ibn Rushd.
SALMAN RUSHDIE: My father decide
was such a admirer of Ibn Rushd'
thinking that he changed the fam
Rushdie.
JEFFREY BROWN: Really?
SALMAN RUSHDIE: Yes. So that's w
Of course, that made me very int
him as a thinker. And then I rea
my father was so interested in h
he was really an incredibly mode
inside our Islamic culture. And
scholar of Aristotle, for exampl
wanted to introduce into that cu
ideas that reason, science, logi
could be brought in and one didn
just believe in blind faith.
And his books were about that, a
him into some trouble.
JEFFREY BROWN: Salman Rushdie, o
found trouble when his 1989 nove
Verses," was denounced as blasph
the Prophet Mohammed, and Iran's
leader, Ayatollah Khomeini, issu
calling for Rushdie's death.
There were violent, even deadly
and Rushdie spent nearly a decad
before the fatwa was lifted.
SALMAN RUSHDIE: This conflict ab
vs. what we now call fundamental
of traditionism, literalism, tha
still going on, you know, and so
it's -- it would be interesting
in the way in which it started.
JEFFREY BROWN: So you're setting
sort of magical story of our tim
after, but grounding it very muc
SALMAN RUSHDIE: Really, it's abo
you see, I was a historian by tr
what I did at university.
So I have always thought that th
of talking, one is the fantastic
you know, the fairy tale, and th
history, the scholarly study of
I think they're both amazing way
human nature, you know? And then
what happens if you push them to
happens if you take the fantasti
historical and bang them into th
JEFFREY BROWN: Since coming out
Rushdie has gotten new attention
man about town, including for a
divorce with model and TV host P
He does seem to regret one parti
of his earlier experience.
SALMAN RUSHDIE: I feel that I go
put into the Islam box.
JEFFREY BROWN: Meaning what?
SALMAN RUSHDIE: Because of what
"The Satanic Verses," because su
thought of as, oh, that Islam gu
guy or whatever.
And I have never really thought
as a writer about religion. And
of the things that happened to m
of all that is that I think it d
people, many people, obscure the
that I actually am.
JEFFREY BROWN: Which is what?
SALMAN RUSHDIE: Well, very often
actually pick up a book of mine
time are kind of surprised. And
letters saying, well, who knew t
good, you know?
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Really?
SALMAN RUSHDIE: I get a lot of l
lot of letters saying, who knew
funny?
JEFFREY BROWN: But, I mean, isn'
you get a lot of attention as a
SALMAN RUSHDIE: Yes, it is odd,
JEFFREY BROWN: It's odd to you?
SALMAN RUSHDIE: It's odd to me b
doesn't happen to a lot of write
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
SALMAN RUSHDIE: And what can I d
me tables in restaurants. It get
tickets. It's not all bad.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: "Two Years Eight
Twenty-Eight Nights," in Rushdie
1,001 nights is the length of th
involving genies and men. We won
the ending, but the writer himse
this way.
SALMAN RUSHDIE: Optimistic, but.
JEFFREY BROWN: Optimistic, but -
you feel?
SALMAN RUSHDIE: One of the thing
the study of history is that his
you. History is not written. It'
you know, that the victory of ev
certain, you know?
So, I thought, let me what else
could you tell this story? And s
does have an unexpected ending.
thought, I don't want it just to
of Pollyannish happy ever after
I had to screw it up a bit.
JEFFREY BROWN: Maybe so, but on
least, the genies were back in t
A great city and its millions of
on about their business.
From the Staten Island Ferry, I'
Brown for the "PBS NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: Five years ago, a no
in Austin, Texas, partnered with
justice center to help students
finish their high school educati
different kind of hands-on appro
classical guitar.
Our Student Reporting Labs speci
Kennedy Huff produced this story
summer internship at local stati
PBS.
JEREMY OSBORNE, Teacher: We can
a bit more dramatic. It's starti
like something again, though, gu
KENNEDY HUFF: These are reassuri
a budding classical guitarist.
JEREMY OSBORNE: It's all the sam
KENNEDY HUFF: They have traded t
for sweater vest, Crocs for loaf
hour every Tuesday and Thursday,
(ph), Peter and Israel (ph) get
their reality.
STUDENT: I used to actually have
anger problem. So when I would l
angry or whatever, or I would be
I guess you could say, or just l
I get my guitar.
KENNEDY HUFF: Austin Classical G
partnering with Gardner Betts' J
Center five years ago. Residents
the class earn their fine arts c
high school and learn better to
emotions that may have gotten th
in the past.
STUDENT: It just gives me someth
when I'm either bored or like th
doing something that's not in my
KENNEDY HUFF: Jeremy Osborne beg
at Gardner Betts last summer.
JEREMY OSBORNE: When I took over
to expect, but there was a lot o
actually. There's a lock on ever
have to memorize a handful of co
through all the different securi
and everything.
And it's really disorienting whe
start. You know, it takes them a
warm up to you or just really ev
at all. And they would test me a
And on the first day, they're ki
-- you think about the guitar is
instrument. And kids are like li
kind of when they're holding it,
like, I just want to make noise.
And then, by the end of the firs
just like, whoa, I can't believe
That's amazing.
KENNEDY HUFF: Students in the pr
the privilege of performing at l
a semester. Last May, they got t
to perform here for the court-ap
advocates of Travis County's swe
JEREMY OSBORNE: We got in the co
played beautifully, this amazing
Like, there was -- they got two
and they just -- they were in th
clothes and looked super profess
they sounded professional, and t
completely elated with themselve
STUDENT: Oh, man. I was scared o
I was the only person that playe
that day. And it was -- I was ne
like, man, if I mess up in front
people -- but I played it. I pla
The director of health services
County Probation Department, Eri
the long-term impact this progra
ERIN FOLEY, Travis County Probat
But I know that the kids who go
program, the types of responses
that we see in them are noticeab
in that what they do with that p
in their treatment alongside of
moves in a positive direction. S
things like accountability, taki
for their actions.
KENNEDY HUFF: The guitar class a
residents a future they might no
was possible.
STUDENT: I'm 18. I never thought
the light. I never thought I wou
day that I would be graduating.
like the feeling that everybody
graduating high school at least,
college at least one year, maybe
out. Instead of going down the w
I can go down the right one, you
KENNEDY HUFF: Prior to joining t
Peter was a high school dropout.
he will attend San Jacinto Colle
music production.
STUDENT: I dropped out in 10th g
go back until I got locked up. I
have took guitar without being h
So, my mom is excited. Usually,
something about me, it was alway
it feels good to have something
graduating high school, learning
the guitar, going to school. Now
every time she sees me, she just
sure her cheeks hurt by now.
KENNEDY HUFF: Reporting for "PBS
for the PBS Student Reporting La
Huff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour" on
Queen Elizabeth II will become t
British monarch, surpassing her
Queen Victoria. In honor of the
we prepared a list of eight thin
know about the two royals. That'
page.
And as we move closer to crownin
tennis champions in New York thi
across the Atlantic have discove
be the earliest printed pictures
The images were found in a Frenc
in 1540. We have more on our Run
Both stories are at PBS.org/News
And that's the "NewsHour" for to
On Wednesday, a look at the fire
the front lines of the blazes ra
I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here to
For all of us here at the "PBS N
thank you, and good night.